#GMO EXPLANATION#

Before we get into the heart of the research project, let us explain what GMOs are. 

Genetically Modified Organisms, also know as GMOs, are organisms which DNA has been altered through engineering techniques, which is why genetic engineering (GE) and genetic modification (GM) are often used interchangeably, as we do in our research.
Officially, genetic engineering is the collection of techniques utilized in biotechnology to cut up and join genetic material (especially DNA) from one or more species and to insert the rearranged product into an organism in order to change an organism’s characteristic(s).
Genetic modification is the process of altering the makeup of an organism’s genes in order to make the organism stronger, healthier, or more functional for human beings. 
These techniques are generally applied to bacteria, animals, virus but for the purpose of our research question, we will focus on the use of GMOs in agriculture i.e. plants. 
Generally, the process to create a GMO plant starts with the identification of a desired trait that a plant lacks, from insect reistance to rapid growth. 
The next step is to find an organism, another plant, which naturally has the gene that allows the needed trait to develop. 
Once the gene with the desired trait is identified, it is copied by scientist and inserted into the initial plant. The latter is grown, and should in theory have all its biological characteristics and ultimately the new said trait.
This method, developed in the 1970s, might seem like science-fiction, but it is not too different, in principle, from traditional selective breeding and cross-breeding farmers
have been putting into action for centuries. However, these traditional practices take a long time and may not always present optimal results, whereas genetic engineering allows
specific changes in a shorter period of time. 
Another method, discovered in the last decade is CRISPR editing. Roughly, it allows DNA fractions within an organism to be modified or deleted, in order to alter gene functions. 
CRISPR editing employs an external protein, from the CRISPR-Cas9 bacteria, that can modify foreign DNA. It is a very powerful tool towards more precise gene editing. 

#OUR MOTIVATIONS#


The question that our group aims to answer encompasses the interests we respectively had in economics, genetics, science policy and sustainability. 
Our focus in the USA is explained by the fact that the USA has been the number one producer of GM crops since 1994.
Despite the controversies lying behind GM crops and the multiple debates regarding the technique's safety, this new technology can trigger substantial socio-economic advantages, environmental benefits and improvements in food security. 
A shared concern that emerged within our group was how despite the revolution in biotechnology - with cheaper, faster genetic sequencing, precise editing tools, and many other technological innovations that can modernise agricultural practice - social and policy considerations lag behind such rapid advancement and can result in a problematic cart-before-the-horse scenario. Before a tangible and equitable benefit can be felt there are considerations that span politics, policy and infrastructure and all hinging on public and stakeholder support. So that’s why we want to ground GMO use in their socio-economic impacts and public opinion.
Although extensive studies corroborate the safety of GM crops, in the absence of effective science communication and public engagement, the cultivation of fear and misinformation has allowed anti-GMO movements and opportunistic markets to proliferate, kick-start subsequent studies and reviews and gain real political traction in the US.

The question of GM crops is also pertinent due to the promise they bring for global sustainable development, as illustrated in the FAO 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development as part of the UN's 17 major Goals.
The SDG agenda aims to end poverty, hunger and malnutrition and enable sustainable development in agriculture, fisheries and forestry. In this context, GM crops is a new technology,
which could have a significant potential in addressing the challenges of sustainable development such as pest and diseases, drought, malnutrition
and food insecurity, notably in developing countries.

Therefore, we want to examine the correlations between socioeconomic factors by state and the production of GM crops to examine to which extent the impact
of GMO plants in agriculture is positive. In addition, we aim to analyse the correlations between public opinion and GM crop production by state.

# LITERATURE REVIEW #

Economic benefits of GM crops 

Genetically modified crops, and thus consumption of all related food products, have been at the center of many debates over the last decades. There is much oppostion due to concerns such as food safety, loss of nutritional value and the polarization of land by large-scale farmers.
(Pew Research Center Science & Society, 2016). However, several studies suggest that the technology's implementation was successful in adressing such challenges. Indeed, the production of GM crops has proved to embrace various agricultural benefits, which have subsequently led to yield higher net incomes (Brookes, G. and Barfoot, P., 2014).

These economic benefits are partly the result of the time saved by the efficient new technology: unlike the traditional farming pactices, there is no tillage production system enabling the farmers to produce two crops instead of one in the same growing season. (Brookes, G. and Barfoot, P., 2014). Time management is similarly optimized as growers no longer have to worry about pests and weeds (Fernandez-Cornejo, J., Wechsler, S., Livingston, M. and Mitchell, L., 2014).

It is thus highly beneficial in terms of economic revenues, not only by saving time, but also in terms of the volume and quality of yielded crops, as farmers are able to grow more crops without requiring additional land. Such free land can be further used to grow other crops and, in turn, generate extra revenues.

According to recent studies on the subject, the adoption of genetically engineered corn and cotton was therefore proved to be positively correlated with increased net returns (Fernandez et al., 2012) while not posing significant greater risks for human health or the environments than traditional breeding (Fagerström, T., Dixelius, C., Magnusson, U. and Sundström, J., 2012).

Public Opinion 

The GMO debate on social media is often characterised to show great divergence in public opinion from scientific consensus; it is deeply politicised and invokes strong emotional response. Social media is an active and dynamic arena that has brought about drastic changes to how humans connect, socialise and express their beliefs. The number of twitter users in the US has risen from 10 million in 2010 to 68 million in 2019, which is over one fifth of the population (Clement, 2021). 

Figures show modest public awareness and substantial misinformation regarding the technology, with 19% of Americans having never heard of GM food, 52% knowing very little and 39% saying GM food is worse for one’s health and can negatively affect the environment (Pew Research Centre, 2016).  Another survey (Hallman et al., 2013) examined public perceptions of labelling genetically modified foods, asking respondents to rate their knowledge GM crop production in the United States and then answer factual questions to measure their actual understanding, before ascertaining whether people’s opinions were based on knowledge of a specific issue or a ‘gut feeling’. Results indicated that people tend to overestimate their knowledge, that 50% based their opinions on gut feelings and also that 66% had never had a conversation about GMOs with anyone. Overall, people still form opinions, and can act on them, with little background information. Considering additional studies we can see how this phenomenon translates over to the social media discourse. A recent study (Wirtz et al., 2020) analyses how the online conversations on GMOs in the US relates to state-level variables such as demographics, ruralness, agricultural dependence, and GMO news and legislation-related experiences. They found that public sentiment did not relate to these variables but, rather, were closely linked with the topics of conversation discussed. The only exception was the state’s agricultural dependence which correlated with more positive and more neutral sentiments.
 
Indeed, the agricultural industry and science community have been seen to lack effective regulation and communication to address the misinformation regarding GM crops (Raman, 2017). Instead, engagement on social media is shown to be dominated by a few alternative health and pro-conspiracy sites as opposed to more stablished media outlets (Ryan, 2020), which can be conducive to the spread of disinformation and the popularity of cyber-activist movements that help drive legislative changes such as the Proposition 37 ballot initiative in California. There are several factors that make this such an explosive topic that relate to our universal psychological tendencies. Firstly, we bestow symbolic and cultural value upon food, making GMOs particularly susceptible to what Hallam refers to as the “Yuck factor” (National Research Council, 2015; p.12) We also have the innate tendency to distrust certain information and cling to our prior beliefs even after being refuted. Other basic cognitive habits include the bandwagon effect, or herd mentality where citizens tend to conform their beliefs about science, society, and risks to those that are perceived to be more dominant among their peers. This is exacerbated by the “echo chamber effect” of social media, in which users can become self-segregated and exposed to limited news and perspectives due to social media algorithms (Törnberg, 2018).
