
In conclusion, the panel regression analysis shows that there is a medium to strong positive relationship between GM corn area and agricultural GDP, as is exemplified by the x-coefficients across all of the regression models. This can also be seen in the positive gradient in Figure A2 and A5.  The panel regression model on the other hand, shows some more variability in the results, especially for the other two x-variables (yield and total employment in agriculture), but still showed positive results for the R-squared. Therefore, the hypothesis is accepted. Nevertheless, there is still a lot of room for improvement, for example the employment variable could be substituted since nowadays agriculture is dominated by machines and the employment in agriculture might not significantly explain the agricultural GDP. Although yield has medium to low coefficients in the panel regression, the correlation between yield and GM corn area also seems linear, which is a reason to substitute for another variable. Overall, there has been a significant increase in GM corn area harvested and produced and most of the top agricultural states except for Texas have a positive correlation between GM corn and agricultural GDP. Meanwhile the map highlights how the highest agricultural economic output is in California, which asks for further analysis of GM crops there and inclusion of other states to improve the model. Although in the United States, agricultural GDP is not the main source of growth and income, these positive results show how similar studies could be applied  in developing countries, which often depend on the agricultural sector to a greater extent.
 
The public opinion analysis shows that for the majority of states, public opinion was moderately correlated with GM corn planted, such as Illinois, Missouri, Texas and Wisconsin. On a national level, interactivity with the topic of GM crops has fluctuated, whilst reflecting the various historical events in GM crop history. However, public opinion is an unstable and abstract concept, which cannot be boiled down to interactivity. Thus, it is uncertain whether the the major events have a more significant correlation with public opinion rather than the GM corn planted. The NLP analysis from the Tweets collected  showed that the associated adjectives with GMOs are mostly negative and campaigns like GMOFreeUSA illustrate the online support of anti GMO sentiment, however a polarity and subjectivity analysis presented conflicting and ambiguous results that the sample was neither negative nor positive. Finally, a dataset from a previous Cambridge research paper on Twitter analysis from 2016-18 showed the polarisation of opinions the sample, with the most negative tweets in Texas. This aspect is interesting, since from the Economic Analysis it is clear that Texas has the least GM corn planted and the relationship between public opinion and GM crops planted should be further explored. Therefore, the analysis suggests that there are highly differing views on GM crops in the United States, possibly reflecting a lack of reliable information available. It is fair to say that public opinion is correlated with GM corn planted, but further analysis of other states as well as other crops is needed to make a more robust conclusion.
